Now that we understand how inheritance
works, now that we understand
how specificity work, let's put these
two together and see how they interact.
So I am taking the look now at chapter
three inside of the course website and
we are looking at specificity and
inheritance together.
And I am looking at the code
pen that we have here.
All right, so the first thing to do
anytime you start working in CSS is always
to look at your HTML first and
understand what's going on with that.
So we'll start with, we have an article.
It has an id of coffee and
it has a class of Joe, followed by an h1,
we have a paragraph with
a link inside of it.
We have a paragraph with subscripts.
This is the formula for caffeine.
And in chemistry,
those would wind up being subscripts.
So that's why we have all those
little sub tags that are in there.
The next paragraph we have some
superscripts inside of it,
those are footnotes and a 10th place.
So those typically go up a little bit,
so we are using superscript for
that same thing in the next paragraph.
And then we have a footer.
The footer contains some references.
We have an h2 for our references,
we have an unordered list, and
there's some links inside of that.
So that is what's going on here.
Now let's just say that I want to
style some of these superscripts.
Those are the ones that go up.
There's a number of them that
are inside of the second paragraph, and
I guess we have one inside
of the third paragraph.
There's a few different ways that I could
wind up writing selectors for this.
So let's write some of these.
I could say article has the color red.
So that is going to turn almost
everything here on this page red.
Why are the links not red?
If the links are not red because they have
a more specific selector that's coming
from the browser's style sheet.
They are targeted towards those links.
They wind up being blue and
underlined when they are not visited.
So that is why that looks the way it does.
After this, we can add to this the p,
with a color blue.
Now, the way we have this right now, the
paragraph comes later, you may be thinking
to yourself, okay, it's later in
the style sheet, so that wins.
But even if I was to take this paragraph,
with the color of blue, and
put it before the article, you would find
out that we still have blue paragraphs and
that is inheritance at work here.
Inheritance is saying that we are closer
to some element that we might be
targeting.
In this case we're going towards the sub,
the superscripts.
And the paragraphs are a little closer
now everything is is blue here.
And then the last one we can add then,
of course is to target sub itself.
And we'll say something
like color brown or
possibly even let's just
make it black again.
We make them black.
No that didn't really work,
let's do brown.
They'll be a little bit.
Stand out a little bit and
we'll add to that a font
weight of bold to try to get
them to stand out a little bit.
So as we get close and
closer to the targeted elements,
we have now three styles that
would all impact our superscripts,
they all have exactly
the same specificity.
So supstyle come last.
We could put it earlier in the cascade
here, earlier on the page.
It still takes effect.
This is because of inheritance and
we are trying to target those superscripts
and this is the closest to that.
Now, we could, of course,
make our article a little bit more
effective on those superscripts.
You might be thinking about this.
We might just wanna add a class to it.
We do have that class
here inside of our HTML.
We have an ID of coffee and
a class of Joe.
Let's add all of those.
So if I said article of coffee.joe.
So now I've got the ID and the class and
the type selector all together there.
The text hasn't changed,
it is still just red.
The little lowly paragraph that comes
later with way lower specificity
that first one there article coffee
Joe that has a specificity of 111.
The paragraph that comes later and 001.
Why is that one winning,
that is Inheritance.
Inheritance is saying that the color
blue is an inherited color it's
close to the paragraph we
wind up with blue text.
So how could we make In this article
style actually apply to the superscript.
The way we'd have to do that is
add an sup, it's up on the end.
Once we've done that,
then we are in fact targeting our
superscripts which are now red and
maybe we can set a background color of
black to make them stand out even more.
There they are, on the page.
And that wins over the brown that we
had previously because now this is
got a very specific selector that is
in fact targeting those superscripts.
So now the specificity is winning out
over just the straight inheritance.
So the next time you are puzzled
as to why some type of elements,
just plain old element,
a type selector is winning over your
super specific bang important type
of style, this is the reason why.
Inheritance is going to take priority
in some situations over specificity.